After London I traveled to Italy for a week to enjoy a little sunshine by myself before continuing to South Africa for my class experience there. Up until this point I hadn't been seeing a great deal of art--architecture, yes, mostly of the church-ly sort, and some related religious trappings, but most of my sightseeing had been history- rather than art-based. In Italy, though, I was in for a huge dose of the classical, from original Hellenistic statues to Roman reproductions to Renaissance copies and reimaginings of the classical style.

Originally my plan for Italy had been to relax for about three days in the Cinque Terre before heading to Rome, but two factors coincided to make that unappealing: first of all, I'd been completely wrong in thinking that I'd miss the high season, and accomodation prices were such that I'd need to stay outside Cinque Terre itself if I wanted to come close to meeting my budget. And second, it was expected to rain every day I was thinking of being in Cinque Terre. Literally every single one. While that wouldn't be much of a problem in some places where the activities are primarily indoors, the hiking and beaches are the Cinque Terre's primary draws.

In light of all that, I decided to stay in the neighborhood of Pisa, where my flight would land, instead. Florence is only about an hour away by train, so a day-trip out that way seemed like an obvious option. Better yet, the first Sunday of each month is "Sunday at the Museum" in Florence--admission to all of its museums is free. There was no way I was going to pass up gratis admission to both the Academy and the Uffizi Gallery, so although it meant missing out on a day to relax after the usual airport hassle, I was up early Sunday to figure out the train system and aim to get to a gallery before the worst of the crowds. I chose to visit the Academy first, primarily because it was closer to the train station.

The Academy's big draw is Michaelangelo's *David*, which I'll get to later, but of course it also boasts loads of other fine Renaissance-era sculpture and painting. Probably my favorite gallery was one that actually held a large number of plaster, rather than finished marble, statues.

The majority of the sculptures in this collection were by [ Botichelli ], and as you can see, the majority of them are small busts--commissions usually arranged by the person portrayed or by one of their relatives. While most galleries focus on major works by an artist, it's neat to see the bread and butter side of the business: dozens of modest busts churned out for anyone looking to get themselves recorded in stone.

It was also interesting to get to learn a bit about the sculpture-carving process here. Like I said, the statues on display in this gallery were mostly plaster rather than marble, and often covered in small holes that look like black stippling from a distance. I'd never thought about sculptures having a "rough draft" before, but of course it makes sense--what are the chances you'd manage to carve something workable, much less an actual masterpiece, cutting into the marble block cold? Rather than doing that, sculptors would create a plaster product they were satisfied with, then reproduce it in stone. The holes drilled into the plaster held rods, somewhat like rulers, which would be moved to the final stone block so that the square of marble around them could be carved like the plaster version. That's why dots tended to be thickest on the faces of the statues--these were generally the most detailed parts, and the hardest to reproduce accurately!

The Academy also has a large collection of primarily religious artwork from the Renaissance. It's lovely, of course, and it can be interesting to compare the evolution of a style or historical attitudes by comparing a lot of examples of a particular archetypical painting, but the Renaissance thirst for imitation and variation on a few major themes got old a little fast for me. It wasn't long before I was feeling burnt out on the endless parade of triptychs, gilt, and  To amuse myself, I thought I would take pictures of some of the funniest-looking Madonna and Child paintings they had, those being the most abundant of the various painting genres in their collection.

[ Is there actually some reason Jesus looks like a grown man in most Madonna and Childs? ]

In the end I didn't get very far with my project. After wandering something like a dozen rooms of Maddona and Childs, I thought I'd finally found it, the most unintentionally creepy and hilarious one of all.

Then I walked into the next room and found something like four more on the exact same theme, and that was it. I was done. The Renaissance had broken me.


My favorite pieces in the Academy were probably a series of unfinished funerary sculptures by Michaelangelo. The incomplete figures look like they're in the process of emerging from the marble--actually tearing themselves free in some cases. [ Michaelangelo was the source of the famous quote about freeing statues from blocks of marble rather than carving them, and that philosophy is definitely on display here. ] It was really cool to be able to see some of the intermediate stages between new hunk of stone and completed statue, how various parts of the statue have been highly detailed or only roughed in. I think the raw nature of these statues lends them an extra sort of energy, like they're 

Unfortunately, the unfinshed statues don't get a load of attention because they happen to stand directly between the tourist and the big draw of the museum, the man himself, Michaelangelo's *David*. You can see him towering in his own domed display gallery after hanging a left from the first room of the museum, surrounded by adoring crowds and flashing cameras. This was the first big-name piece of artwork I was seeing in Florence, and it didn't disappoint.

What this trip really drove home to me was how different it is to see a piece of art in person, rather than as a photo in a textbook or online. And for a piece like David, there's nothing like seeing it life-sized instead of shrunk to fit on page or screen. You get to see all kinds of details; on this statue I was particularly impressed with the musculature, a lot of which you don't see that well in pictures, and the crazy details like the veins in the backs of David's hands. Being there, it's easy to see why *David* is so perenially popular--even amidst the milling tourists and flashing cameras, it has a real presence, the sort of quiet confidence you get from that casual pose contrasted with the fact of the statue being totally ripped.

I wrapped up my visit to the Academy by checking out the recently-opened display of musical instruments, which was very small but an interesting diversion. While I knew the Medici as hugely influential in the art world through their commissions, I didn't realize that its members had made any substantial contributions of their own. But it was a Medici who invented the [ harpsichord ], though, and the museum had a couple fine examples of those on display. Many of the instruments in the collection were unusual, or at least would be considered unusual today, like the serpentine, a snaky woodwind instrument, or the harpsichord itself. One particular factoid I thought was interesting: a lot of popular instruments in the day were designed to be played by upper-class women. They featured keys instead of strings for producing sound, so they could be played without tearing up a delicate lady's fingernails!

After the Academy, I spent the afternoon at the Uffizi Gallery, which is located in a former Medici villa and [ reconstructed to resemble the place at the height of the family's power ]. This means it's absolutely crammed with more Renaissance-era art, just as it would have been when the family was flauting their wealth with the finest Roman-era artwork and reproductions they could acquire. And, it being the Renaissance era, there was going to be a boatload of religious iconography, including, yet again, more Madonna and Childs than you could shake a stick at.

For me, the statuary was more interesting, and there was plenty of that, too, lining the long corridors of the gallery's multiple floors. There were also other artifacts that I found more interesting simply because I hadn't seen as many of them in other galleries: tapestries, illuminated manuscripts, and other small curios, most of them made by nuns. My favorite aspect of the gallery by far, though, was the painted ceilings. While I'm sure they were less expensive than the acquisition of all the paintings and statues, to me they're, the most striking representation of the family's wealth in the entire building. The sheer amout of effort and time that must have gone into painting them is staggering, and the results are exquisitely detailed and enchanting. Historical and biblical scenes are set amongst whimsical representations of monsters and saints and even domes painted to appear like they were greenhouse roofs. I spent a lot of my time in the Gallery looking up, squinting at the tiny details overhead.

Overall I didn't like the Uffizi Gallery as much as I liked the Academy, though that might have been a function of the fact that I visited second and had already gotten an overdose of the Renaissance, or simply that it was bigger and there was no way I could get more than a taste of all the galleries. The two of them together were more than enough artwork for one day, and if I'd had the time spacing them out across multiple days would definitely have let me appreciate them more.

In fact, my favorite art gallery in Italy wasn't in Florence at all. The National Museum of Rome  isn't high on a lot of "to do in Rome" itineraries, and a large factor in my visiting it was its proximity to my hostel, but it ended up being one of the highlights of my entire Italy trip. As a museum rather than an art gallery as such, it included a lot more information on the historical context of different items and what was being represented in them, something I would have greatly appreciated at the galleries in Flornce, where I was often squinting at Biblical scenes, trying to figure out what was going on in them. I also picked up a lot of details of Roman history and daily life that I previously didn't know about, like the fact that different calendar days were associated with different functions and it could be auspicious or inauspicious to carry out different sorts of business on certain days of the week, or that Romans [ took up fish farming and ate a lot of seafood that had been raised in manmade pools ]. Those kinds of little factoids are usually my favorite part of a museum visit, and the National Museum had a ton of them.

More than anything, though, I appreciated the museum for the fact that it was virtually empty. When compared to the insane tourist crush at attractions like the Trevi fountain or Vatican Museums, the very small crowds at the National Museum made browsing a pleasure, and even if you weren't someone who's into art or museums, it would probably be worth a visit just for the opportunity to get away from the hot, chaotic bustle of Rome in a quiet, air-conditioned and mostly empty building. I'm honestly not sure why this museum is so much less popular than a lot of the other attractions, given that I recognized several of its pieces from textbook photographs despite being far from any kind of art history major, and while I appreciated its relative obscurity for my own selfish reasons, I think it's really too bad that it doesn't get more attention, because the collection really is fantastic.

Probably the highlight of the National Museum's collection is a partial reconstruction of a Roman villa [ excavated where/how? ]. The frescoes lining the walls were carefully removed and re-fitted into the gallery, so you can stroll down a corridor something like what would have existed in the building itself, peer into rooms and compare the kinds of decorations in the mens' and womens' sleeping chambers. The largest and most extensive frescoe, one of those that I'd defintely seen in textbooks before, was [ what room? ]. It gives the illusion of standing in a lush garden while indoors, with birds, plants, and fruit rendered so carefully that it's possible to distinguish the species of many of the plants and animals. I couldn't help but compare the work here with the outdoor scenes on the Uffizi Gallery ceiling, where over a thousand years later painters were trying to reproduce the style and capture some of the same magic and life as had been seen in Roman artwork.

One statue that caught my attention depicted a young boy strangling a goose, which I thought was an odd theme for statuary. I decided I needed to get a picture of it to try and look it up later and get some idea what in the heck was going on. Thankfully Google perfectly understood my search for "boy strangling goose vatican museums" and returned enough results for me to conclude that nobody's really sure, but for whatever reason goose-strangling was a popular motif in ancient Rome, so it's actually a fairly common sight in art from the period. Another reminder of the pity we should have for whatever poor historians find themselves charged with sifting through the internet archives and confronted with making sense of all the byzantine memes [insert meme here]. Also disputed is whether the boy's actually strangling the goose or simply playing with it, but judging by the expression on the one in this statue, the goose certainly *thinks* it's getting strangled, regardless of what the boy thinks he's doing with it.

Of course, the main draw of the Vatican Museums and the one piece people are actually 
