Walking to Machu Picchu
====

There are certain names that conjure up a spirit of adventure, of jungle-choked ruins, of ancient civilizations and fearsome magics, and most of all *adventure*. Vilcabamba. El Dorado. *Machu Picchu.*

Or, if you don't actually get a shivery thrill at the utterance of those names, it's possible you didn't grow up with movies like *The Road to El Dorado* or the *Emperor's New Groove,* playing *Amazon Trail* or educational programs about conquistadors. Which is too bad, really, but it's not something that can't be helped. Whether or not they've been bitten by the ancient-Inca bug, most people have at least heard of Machu Picchu, have some vague notion of it as a "lost city," would recognize photographs of ruins under the iconic, pyramidal mountain.

These days Machu Picchu is Peru's most popular tourist destination, welcoming [how many] eager visitors each year, and a rabid tourist industry has grown up in relatively-nearby Cusco to accommodate it. You can arrive at Machu Picchu by almost any means availale: by van or hulking tourist bus, by train or bike or ATV. An increasingly-popular option, however, is to travel to the place the same way the Incas did--on foot.

It's even possible to use the same road the Incas did. This is the Inca trail, typically a three-day hike along the remains of the Incan Royal Road, which runs straight up to Machu Picchu's famous sun gate, and most tours are calibrated to deposit trekkers there just before dawn to watch the sun rise over the Machu Picchu complex. The Inca Trail is a bucket-list dream for many an adventure-seeker, and is the sort of activity that requires careful planning and forethought. Due to concerns over the volume of people passing along the trail, access is limited to only 500 people per day, which comes nowhere close to meeting demand. When I was in Cusco, in early October, I saw signs announcing that ticket reservations for *the next year* would be opening in about a week, reminding tourists that popular days often sell out within hours of the ticket window opening, and encouraging them to pre-book, naturally, with whatever travel agency was helpfully providing the reminder.

As I wasn't even sure what dates I would be in Peru until a month or so beforehand, it was clear that I wouldn't be taking the Inca Trail. But, fortunately for me and others of the procrastinating persuasion, the overcrowding of the Inca Trail has caused a blossoming of alternative hiking opportunities. You can make epic week-long journey to the ruins, enjoy a hike that takes you through small Andean villages to stay with local people, or even try the recently-conceived "adventure trail," designed to cater to the less walking-oriented and providing the option of ziplining, rafting, and mini-vaning up to the ruins.

Probably the most popular alternative hike, though, is the Salkantay trail. It lacks the abundance of ruins found along the Inca Trail, and you lose out on the feeling of walking in the ancients' footsteps, but on the other hand it also lacks the abundance of stairs (more on those later) found along the Inca Trail, and rather than ruins offers more nature-y points of interest. There are any number of companies that will provide you with a guide, food, accommodation along the way, and so on, although it's entirely possible to do the trek on your own, and I saw several people along the way who'd chosen to do just that.

Not me, though. I'd never done a proper multi-day hike before, and certainly didn't have the proper equipment. I decided to book a trip with [Salkantay Trekking](http://salkantaytrekking.com), a solidly mid-budget option with decent reviews. My trip was around $400 for four days, while the highest-end companies run about $200 more than that and your bargain-bin option is typically about $200 less.

I ended in a group of six plus a guide, and we'd also be accompanied by two cooks, a man in charge of the horses and pack mules, and not specifically associated with our group, numerous porters who hauled supplies and luggage out through the wilderness. Although Salkantay Trekking keeps its trekking groups to twelve people maximum, there are inevitably multiple groups leaving per day; two of them my group saw a fair amount, as we ran at pretty similar paces, but there had to be at least five total. It was a great trip, up and down mountains, across rivers and into the jungle and over the course of 78 kilometers and five days. I'm writing more of a blow-by-blow about it than what I normally post, so I'm going to split the story up across multiple posts so you can easily check out what you're interested in without having to slog through so many thousands of words. For a brief taste of what each day has to offer, here's a nice map I cribbed off Salkantay Trekking's web site:

And the articles themselves. Happy reading!

- Intro (this post)
- Day 1:
- Day 2:
- Day 3:
- Day 4:
- Day 5: Machu Picchu

--

In Peru I got used to pre-five-AM wake-up calls, even worse than the ~5 AM schedule we typically kept to while in South Africa. Most organized tours depart between 3 and 4:30 AM, not out of any desire to catch the early-morning animals, as it was when we were on safari, but a combination of wanting to hike outside the heat of the day and the fact that Cusco, for all its status as a tourist mecca, is not actually particularly close to anything. Even for sites that are, topographically, fairly close to the city, winding and often unpaved mountain roads increase travel time to the point that most people wanting a pre-9AM start to their activity are often faced with leaving in darkness.

And this was easily the scariest portion of the trek: the drivers negotiating pre-dawn mountains on the way to the trailhead, swerving out around the sinuous mountain curves, which, although it wasn't possible to see the details of the long, long way down . Peruvian mountain roads are made even more exciting by the fact that they're often one-lane, with the only only means of telling whether someone's barrelling towards you around a blind curve being the application of the horn, as it is in basically all Peruvian driving situations.

The sun was well up by the time we piled out of the van and 

One of the amenities Salkantay Trekking likes to play up is their "Sky Lodge" accommodation for the first night of travel. These are essentially half-domes of thick glass, letting you view the night sky while you lie in your sleeping bag, quietly freezing to death--though truth be told, I was pretty cozy with my sleeping bag, thermal blanket, and wearing all the cold-weather gear I possessed. I was actually travelling in the shoulder season, though, and Peru's early spring--I can imagine it would have been a bit more chilly if I'd come in August.

--

Most people consider day two of Salkantay the most difficult, as it's a full day of hiking along with the steepest uphill climbs anywhere in the trek. This is also the day you get up close to Salkantay itself--though you'll be going nowhere near the actual peak, which was only scaled for the first time in 2012 and requires more than a 

This is also the first day you'll be experiencing the 4:30 AM wake-up call with cup of coca tea--the [Salkantay Trekking] itinerary literally states, "Your guide will wake you in your [geodome] with a steaming cup of coca tea," and it's clear both that they try to stick EXACTLY to the itinerary to keep the tourists happy, and also that they have the whole grind pretty much down to a science.

Coca tea is popular in Peru, especially among the hiking set, because it's a mild stimulant and supposed to help with altitude sickness in particular. Coca leaves are the precursor to cocaine, although the amount of active molecules they contain is practically homeopathic--it takes pounds of them to produce a single gram of cocaine.

For my part, I was fortunate not to experience altitude sickness in Peru, so I can't speak to coca's efficacy there, although loads of people swear by it. Does it help with hiking? Not to such a degree that I could say I actually noticed, but I took it when it was offered, because why not? It's not something you'd be able to try in the US--indeed, I was kind of surprised by the amount of coca candy, leaves, etc. for sale at the airport duty-free, simply because any unwary tourist headed somewhere like the US would, I think, be asking to get slide-tackled by the DEA the moment they stepped off the plane. Will drug-sniffing dogs pick up on coca like they will cocaine? No idea, but it's not something I'd want to experiment with. Let the buyer beware, I suppose.

--

Day four would bring us our first glimpse of Machu Picchu.

It involved, of course, another 4:30 wake-up call and 

To be standing near the top of a mountain, looking out and being told that in one day we were going to descend that mountain and walk around 

For some reason I spent the entire afternoon unreasonably cranky. I was *mad*, even though there was no particular reason to be mad, and was moving quite slowly as well, again for no apparent reason. My best post-mortem assessment was that I was wearing bad socks--ones that developed holes in the heels and which were scratchy and uncomfortable every inch of their length. If 

Don't get me wrong, this is easily the most boring segment of the trail: it's flat, flat, flat, and long, and offers little protection from the hot and beating sun. It's also the only reasonable on-foot route between Hidroelectrico and Aguas Calientes, which means that, unlike most of the trail where it was just the other [Salkantay Trekking] groups and a smattering of independents, 

There's actually no actual road or trail that follows the Hidroelectrico-Aguas Calientes route, which means, despite numerous signs warning against it, everyone follows the railroad tracks, often walking up on the ties themselves, which don't slide around under the feet the way the rockfill that otherwise makes up most of the trail does. The tourist train that makes the route doesn't exactly run at a blistering speed, but it was still a bit unnerving to watch one of the trains chugging past, inches away from tourists who'd been caught between the tracks and a sheer rock face.

The end of all this walking was Aguas Calientes, literally "hot waters," an unabashed tourist town perhaps [a quarter mile] from the entry to the park. Aguas Calientes is a tourist attraction in its own right, thanks to, as the name suggests, its hot springs. These are obviously an attraction to the footsore traveler who's been hoofing it for days on end, but I'm not much of a water person myself, and the springs are reputedly pretty dirty in addition to being clogged with tourists. I skipped them.

This was our first hotel stay, and one pretty much everyone was ready, though I'd sprung for a hot shower on the second night so I hadn't been without for as long as some people. Ironically enough, given the name of the town, our shower started out cold--though fortunately they got it fixed soon enough, and my roommate and I could enjoy an early night of warm cleanliness before our final climb.

--

What time do you get up in the morning to make it to Machu Picchu? Imagine that you're supposed to be meeting your guide at six to catch the sunrise light on the complex, and that this is also the objective of every other tourist currently swelling the popluation of Aguas Calientes. There's a tourist bus that will haul you to the park entry in about fifteen minutes, but imagine that, after four days of hiking, you're still feeling like you want the *full experience*, which means going by foot along the same steep path that [that professor dude] did back in [nineteen-oh-whatever]. The gates open at 4:30 AM, of course, to accommodate everyone who needs to make it up by dawn, and so if you want to be one of the earliest entrants, after the walk over from the city...

My roommate and I were up before 3:30, and even then we weren't the first ones down in the lobby to grab our pre-packed breakfasts. After that it was fast-walking through the totally dark streets to stay ahead of the other flashlights out and bobbing about, and in the end our group were within the first couple dozen people in line. This meant a while sitting around, eating our hardboiled eggs and avocado while park officials who'd no doubt had to get up even earlier than us hung out around the gate and some of Peru's ubiquitous stray dogs prowled the waiting tourists, looking for handouts.

I had, perhaps unwisely, booked an additional hike for myself--if you're going to Machu Picchu anyway, you might as well cram in as many sights as possible, right? And after four days of climbing, what's one more?

Machu Picchu offers two well-known additional excursions, one to the Sun Gate, where hikers coming in off the Inca Trail will enter anyway, and one to the "Inca Bridge,"  a small monument to the marvels of Incan engineering and reminder of why you probably didn't want to be around in times when it was cutting-edge. These are free and relatively short. There are also hikes up to either one of the two mountains that rise up over the ruins; these are paid, accept a limited number of hikers per day, and you can choose only one or the other.

The better known of these is the hike up Huayna Picchu, which you may recall is the smaller mountain that appears in most photos of the ruins. The other is Machu Picchu Mountain--the mountain is *named* Machu Picchu, and it's from its slopes that those iconic ruin photos tend to be taken. The Huayna Picchu hike is shorter and more popular, but also supposedly a bit steeper. I decided to go with the hopefully less precipitous, and also hopefully less crowded option in Machu Picchu Mountain. Steep stairs and big crowds didn't sound like a great combination to me.

Only one other member of my group had a ticket for the mountain (the others had no additional hikes at all, and so had more time if they felt like a dip in the hot springs), and although we made plans to do it together, they ended up not working out. So it was me by myself, with only a couple hundred other upwards-travelers to keep me company on the climb.
