When I was looking for a way from Switzerland to Scandinavia, it turned out that it was substantially cheaper to take a flight to Paris, and then a second on to Denmark, rather than trying to fly direct. This would give me something like an extended layover in the city. I'd been to Paris before, but only in the sense that I got to see some of the airport before my high school group was bundled onto a bus and driven out to our first actual stop, so why not, I thought. A couple days in Paris, what could go wrong?

Two days of 95+-degree weather, it turns out, in a city not exactly known for its air conditioning.

--

I wasn't going to let a bit of heat stop me from getting out and seeing the sights, but I was at a bit of a loss. Under ordinary circumstances, the protocol for sightseeing under adverse temperatures is simple enough: pick some nice indoor activities and spend as much time as possible in some cavernous ice-cold museum. Not as nice getting to enjoy the streetside sights and bustle of the city, maybe, but better than getting to enjoy them with the soles of your shoes sticking to the pavement.

Unfortunately, most museums in Paris aren't air-conditioned and a lot of the big names are, naturally, packed at all hours. The Louvre can supposedly be stuffy and uncomfortably warm even on a cold day, heated by the milling bodies of all the tourists trying to admire the masterpieces in spite of all the other tourists. The Louvre does actually have air conditioning in some areas, albeit of the French type that mitigates the heat rather than making a room cold, but I decided I didn't fancy fighting my way through a bunch of sweaty, cranky people in an enclosed space, and decided to look for other options.

Outside was as good as inside, then, and I decided to begin with a walking tour, a prerecorded Rick Steves one. That way I'd be able to pause it if I needed to hang out in the shade somewhere, I could skip anything that looked like it was going to be too sun-exposed, and I could simply abandon it without feeling guilty if the sun was too punishing. This started me out at Notre Dame, but I chose not to go in just yet, figuring that I might appreciate popping into the dim and hopefully-cool church interior later on in the day when the sun was higher and I'd been walking for a while.

From there the tour took me around most of the well-known sites in the area: XXX, YYY, Revolutionary Square and its fountain. The most unexpectedly interesting stop was the Transport Memorial, which was marked without explanation on my walking tour but which turned out to be [ a memorial to the French nationals, mostly Jewish, who were transported to concentration camps outside the country during World War II ]. I managed to miss the real entrance completely, coming in from the park it's a part of rather than the street, and had to be chased down by the attendant, since like all French attractions these days I had to submit to a cursory bag check before I could take the steps down to the memorial proper. I saw the poor guy have to run out after three other groups in the time I was there, so evidently they could have chosen a better location for the gate. In any case, . Very unexpected, but a worthwhile addition to the tour on top of the usual churches, statues, and famous streets.

Towards the end came my favorite stop on the tour, the [ stained-glass cathedral ] built by [ some French guy ] to house the crown of thorns. The thought of someone actually going out and *buying* the supposed crown of thorns placed on Jesus' head during the crucifiction boggled my mind, and the fact that the guy had enough money left over to finance the building of the cathedral and then went so far as to 

I hadn't even managed to finish the tour yet, after around three hours that included ample breaks for sitting in the shade, but was starting to feel like I could use the cool quiet of a museum. I'd decided on visiting the Cluny museum, which was conveniently nearby, which I hoped would be relatively uncrowded because it's not one of the big names, and which I had a vain hope might have air conditioning. I turned out to be out of luck as far as AC went, but the museum was definitely quiet, dim, and housed in an old stone building, so overall I could't complain about the atmosphere.

The focus of the museum was medieval art, which unfortunately I'd already gotten perhaps too much exposure to in other places (so many Madonna and Childs... so many...), but included a lot of interesting non-painting artifacts, including a large number of tapestries. The main draw of the museum is actually [ the unicorn tapestries ]. This is a series of [ six ] tapestries depicting a woman, a lion, and a unicorn in various settings intended as an allegory for the five senses (and perhaps a mysterious sixth): here [ describe these a bit ].

I wanted to get in the Eiffel Tower, too, which was supposed to be particularly nice in the evening, but after sitting in the fairly-cool dim of Notre Dame for half an hour or so, I simply didn't feel like dragging myself over there and then up into the tower itself. I doubted I'd be feeling all that much more energetic after a day at Versailles, but ultimately ended up caving and dragging myself back to the hostel rather than going for more sightseeing. I might end up leaving Paris without having gotten more than a distant glimpse of its most iconic landmark, but I felt more than accomplished after visiting as many sights as I did despite the swelter.

--

Technically, I suppose I only spent one day in Paris. On the next, I decided to get out of the city for a bit and visit the palace at Versailles. This was an easy day-trip, although there was almost an hour extra travel time added by the fact that my hostel was on the far opposite end of the city from the relevant train line (hmm, why *was* it so reasonably-priced, anyway?). By the time I arrived, the sun was high and another baking day was well in progress, and the brief walk between the train station and the palace felt like a long, slow march into an oven. It would all prove worth it, of course, once I caught sight of the actual palace.

I have to admit I wasn't entirely sure what I was getting into with ethis one. I knew the palace was a palace, of course, and the main attractions were its furnishings and extensive gardens. Also one of the top attractions near Paris, although the internet appeared sharply divided on whether it was really worth visiting. What really sold me, though, were reports that although the building was not air conditioned, it often stayed fairly cool through the simple mechanism of opening windows to admit cross-breezes. (Having gone back to look for the online quote that I thought I remembered convincing me on the matter, I can only find people lamenting how incredibly stuffy the place is, and how interminable it is in the heat. Well, it ended up working out for me!)

So armed only with the tiny thumbnail photos I'd seen on online travel web sites, I was completely unprepared for the size of the building at the far side of the large and far-too-exposed courtyard. The place was *big*. You could probably cram about six York Minsters in there (though, to be fair, the pointy bits on the minster do make it a bit taller). Tourists and hawkers milled in a courtyard that looked like it could comfortably host an Olympic-scale event. *Big*, is what I'm saying. And scorching, on that particular day, with not a speck of shade anywhere. The hawkers were all selling water and sun hats, and a sprinkler had been set up in the middle of the courtyard so guests could cool off on their way up to the ticket office or while figuring out the correct entrance (there were several).

On the inside, though, the building was refreshingly cool and breezy with all the windows thrown open. It also helped that the palace was, of course, built to accommodate huge crowds; certainly plenty of people hadn't been deterred by the heat, but the palace swallowed them all up without much problem. Rooms could be crowded, but they never achieved packed-in levels, and it wasn't nearly as bad as, say, the Vatican Museums, where it was almost impossible to move in any direction that wasn't following the slow crowd shuffle towards the Sistine Chapel. Little touches like the fountain in the courtyard or the sprayer truck that drove slowly through a crowd of squealing mostly-schoolchildren out in the gardens showed that at least someone cared and was actively making an effort to mitigate the heat.

And with that largely taken care of, I could enjoy the palace itself, which was every bit as lavish as you'd hope for from [ a French king at the height of the country's power ]. Fancy ceilings seem to be a weakness of mine, and they were definitely on display 
